clinical laboratories that process different types of samples should develop SOPs for each validated sample type. The reagents and protocols used for pooled analysis of patient specimens must be detailed and should include the sequence information of the barcodes used for each patient sample. Metrics and quality control parameters used to assess run performance must also be documented. determine and summarize regions that failed analysis if they are not covered by orthogonal technologies. Methods, instruments, and reagents used for processing and analyzing a sample can be identified and traced in the laboratory's records. The laboratory maintains an exception log for patient samples where steps used in the NGS analytic wet bench process deviate from standard operating procedures. The laboratory has a policy for monitoring, implementing, and documenting upgrades to instruments, sequencing chemistries, and reagents or kits used to generate NGS Data. Each laboratory performing NGS must have a policy in place that clearly documents indications for confirmatory testing and/or documents how their assay validation determined that such testing was not required.CAP accredited laboratories must develop and follow a quality management plan. The design of the program must be written, and compliance with that design documented.  A good quality assurance program for laboratories performing NGS will include the following attributes: 1) The quality assurance program follows the path of workflow. The programs should assess pre-analytic steps occurring before NGS, analytic testing, and post-analytic processes used in sequence analysis through reporting; 2) The NGS quality program should be integrated within the institution's overall quality assurance program and fit well within its overall context if part of a larger institution; 3) The program should address common problems that arise in the course of testing. Documentation includes both review of the effectiveness of corrective actions taken and the revision of policies and procedures intended to prevent recurrence; 4) Goal of the quality program aims to ensure that testing is clinically relevant. The appropriateness of test orders and analytic decisions must be grounded in medical science and evidence; 5) The program should also encourage laboratory employees to communicate concerns about the quality of laboratory testingAnalytic performance of NGS procedures must be internally validated before clinical implementation. Each step needs to be individually optimized to empirically determine optimal assay conditions and analysis settings.Essential performance characteristics that need to be determined during the validation are the analytic sensitivity and specificity, accuracy, precision, and limit of detection.Validation should also be conducted independently for each accepted specimen type (blood, saliva, tissue, etc). Because it is not possible to validate all theoretically possible variants that can occur, it is necessary to use a combination of a "methods-based" and "analyte-specific" validation approach for determining a test's analytic performance. In most cases, Sanger sequencing is considered the gold standard comparative technique. However, variant validation information may also be obtained from oligonucleotide microarray genotyping data in some cases. NGS Work Group concluded that statistical considerations with regard to the number of samples CANNOT be universally or comprehensively applied across the numerous assays that are possible when using NGS sequencing methodologyAnalytic sensitivity can be assessed by using a methods based approach that aims at maximizing the number of sequence variants that are compared to a gold standard method to increase confidence of analytic performance and these values may then be extrapolated to all bases. It is important to determine a "baseline" performance by using as many different genomic regions as possible, as sequence context can be an important influence. Laboratories should determine analytic performance separately for all variant types that are relevant for the test. It is useful to determine the average number of false positive calls for the regions tested in a clinical sample. Determining the limit of detection is important for assays that interrogate samples with heterogeneous genotypes. Precision (inter-run and intra-run variability) should be determined by using at least 3 samples. For tests that are performed with single-lane sequencers, intra-run variability may be determined by using bar-coded replicates of the same sample. Laboratories must be able to document compliance with their confirmatory testing policy and show evidence of ongoing monitoring of their NGS assay(s) to ensure that the benchmarks achieved during the validation process are maintained during the routine performance of NGS based clinical testing and variant reporting. The extent of revalidation and confirmation is dependent on the magnitude of the introduced changes and their potential consequences. Minor changes, can be addressed by confirming adequate performance. A major change would require a more extensive revalidation. A upfront bioinformatics homology analysis is useful to determine possible interference by homologous sequences. In addition, read-mapping quality can be used to identify problematic regions. If such genes are included in the NGS test, the laboratory must devise a method to ensure that identified variants are not due to pseudogene sequence and must document the accuracy of the method. When pooled sequencing of bar-coded samples is performed, the laboratory must document that individual sample identity is maintained throughout the wet bench process.laboratories must use an SOP to document the bioinformatics pipeline used to analyze, interpret and report NGS results - include all algorithms, software and databases. Versions of each component must be recorded and traceable for each patient result. Must document customizations or include which parameters, cutoffs, and values are used. when describing the bioinformatics pipeline, laboratories should document the overall workflow of data analysis and include the input and output files for each process step. For each step, must develop and document quality control parameters. laboratories should also document the bioinformatics processes that are used for reducing a large variant data set to a list of causal and/or candidate genes and/or variants laboratories must have a policy for monitoring updates, patch-releases, and other upgrades to the bioinformatics pipeline. It should also address when such updates will be implemented. the laboratory should maintain records that clearly document regular monitoring and implementation of updates. laboratories must establish and follow a procedure for the storage of data files generated by the bioinformatics pipeline. It must specify data file retention times and which files will be retained after a final report has been generated. Policy for data storage and file retention times must be in accordance with local, state, and national requirements for storage of data. the NGS Work Group recommends that, if feasible, laboratories retain sequence files with corresponding quality scores (FASTQ files) or retain an archival format from which these files can be regenerated (BAM files) The specific versions of each component and, where available, associated configurations of the bioinformatics pipeline for analyzing NGS data, especially when based primarily on open-source software, is often composed of a combination of different software packages, scripts, and databasesfor in house generated scripts and software packages, changes in the script or software should also be documented, but documentation of each component of the pipeline does not need to appear in the patient report. Rather, it is acceptable to refer to the pipeline as a whole, using a laboratory-specific designation. Laboratory specific designations should be unique to a single combination of pipeline components and configurations. Deviations from the laboratory SOP during any step used in the bioinformatics pipeline are documented in an exception log file. Any failures arising during the bioinformatics process should also be recorded in the exception log and include documentation of the issues, the results of any investigations, any corrective actions taken, and pertinent communications, with signoff by the lab director or designee. Exception log is also required to retain links to the patient reports. Documentation may also be incorporated into the monthly quality assurance report. deviation must be documented along with the outcome and explanation The reason for deviation should be described in the exception log, as well as the specific components of the deviation. Each deviation should be linked to the associated patient case and be reviewed by the appropriate laboratory director or designee. laboratories must establish rigorous processes to ensure the protection and privacy of this information [PHI]. Procedures to ensure confidentiality should include data encryption, secure data transfer, user authentication with controlled access to protected health information, and audit trails that track the transmission of data as well as the receiving entities and/or users. Laboratories should also follow standard requirements in the HIPPA when transferring sequencing data to maintain patient confidentiality and security.while it may be possible to address the challenge of co-alignment of highly homologous sequences bioinformatically, laboratories may need to set up independent alternative method assays for these problematic regions.laboratories must maintain a record of deviations from expected results and document the investigative measures that were used to determine the cause as well as the corrective measures that were implementedlabs must be aware of the lack of consensus in how transcript versions are used for variant numbering. Laboratories should have a mechanism to monitor for such changes and use great caution when any variant designation changes are made in clinical reports.The laboratory must have a policy for selection of reference laboratories and other service providers for NGS test referral. Referral may include the entire NGS test process or only the wet bench or bioinformatics processes. The CAP Laboratory General Checklist requirement 41350 states that the laboratory director or designee is responsible for the selection of an external reference laboratory or other service provider. It is expected that the laboratory director or designee ensure the quality of performance of the external NGS wet bench and/or bioinformatics service provider. Some of the specific aspects that the laboratory director needs to consider in selecting external reference laboratories or service providers is the 1) turnaround time 2) is CLIA certified or meets selection criteria as per CAP requirements if providing analytic wet bench information, 3) quality of results from bioinformatics service provider is verified to be accurate and of high standards. For evidence of compliance, copies of valid CLIA certifications from CLIA-certified external reference laboratories are required for those who outsource the wet bench sequencing workflow. Copies of in-house validation of non-CLIA certified entities providing bioinformatics analysis are required for those entities that outsource the bioinformatics workflow. The laboratory has a documented quality management program for the NGS bioinformatics pipeline. An appropriate quality management program provides the structure and process for investigating these divergences to pinpoint possible causes, and institute appropriate corrective measures. laboratories must empirically determine which algorithms and associated bioinformatics tools to apply to each diagnostic application. once a satisfactory bioinformatics validation has been achieved, translation of the NGSD assay into the clinical laboratory requires that laboratories document all aspects of the bioinformatics processes used for clinical diagnostics and implement a quality management program for these steps. the laboratory should assess the error rates for several representative examples by variant type. NGS Work Group acknowledged that it was not feasible to comprehensively and exhaustively define the error rates for false positives and false negatives in variant calls. indexed sequences need to be validated with respect to their uniqueness in a pool and the pipeline must be able to accurately bin such indexed sequences. It is essential to establish criteria for retention or exclusion of sequence reads. for those assays in which limit of detection is relevant, such as identification of somatic mutations in tumor samples, the bioinformatics pipeline needs to be assessed for that parameter. when using exome and genome sequencing for causal and candidate gene identification, the laboratory must additionally validate its bioinformatics pipeline for this purpose. evidence of compliance for a bioinformatics pipeline validation/revalidation would include the records of validation and any subsequent revalidation and their documented approval for clinical use. the laboratory validates the bioinformatics pipeline and revalidates the entire pipeline and/or confirms he performance of the components of the pipeline as satisfactory when modifications are made. The extent of revalidation and/or confirmation is modification dependent. For labs offering the entire process from wet bench through bioinformatics analysis, the validation of the bioinformatics pipeline should be included in the overall test validation. Therefore, any change to a different version of a software package, script, or internal or external database, or change to the configuration of any software, would require a new unique laboratory-specific designation and would require assay validationOnce a bioinformatics pipeline has been validated to meet laboratory requirement and has been implemented, revalidation is required when any changes are made in the pipeline. A practical approach that can be used to revalidate a sequencing pipeline is to use sequence read files from the original validation and simply reanalyze them with the new parameters. it is recommended that laboratories use the Web-based versions of the ACMG guidelines as they represent the latest revisions. It is recommended that the ACMG classification system for inherited diseases be used as reference to increase consistency in variant classification. Disease and gene-specific modification may be necessary and should be documented. For other clinical genomic testing, the laboratory should use its best judgment to categorize variants and adopt guidelines as they emerge. laboratories should be cautious when interpreting the potential clinical consequences of sequence changes and carefully consider evidence for disease causation, frequency in the general population, and functional studies. laboratories should be aware of the potential for finding incidental, clinically significant resultsIt is therefore useful to provide the transcript accession number and version along with the protein syntax in clinical reports to help avoid confusion. laboratories should have a policy in place for whether and how these results will be reported for those assays where such incidental findings are expected. ACMG recommendations include a minimum gene list for which, if a known mutation is found, it should be reported. Labs may choose to follow ACMG recommendations or develop their own policies. If the laboratory's policy is not to report incidental findings or to limit reporting to a subset of variants related to a particular disease state, this should be clearly stated in the laboratory report for assays where incidental findings are expected. ethical considerations must also be taken into account when deciding whether to reveal certain genetic information to patients. 