clinical laboratories that process different types of samples should develop SOPs for each validated sample type. The reagents and protocols used for pooled analysis of patient specimens must be detailed and should include the sequence information of the barcodes used for each patient sample. Metrics and quality control parameters used to assess run performance must also be documented. 
determine and summarize regions that failed analysis if they are not covered by orthogonal technologies. 
Methods, instruments, and reagents used for processing and analyzing a sample can be identified and traced in the laboratory's records. 
The laboratory maintains an exception log for patient samples where steps used in the NGS analytic wet bench process deviate from standard operating procedures. 
The laboratory has a policy for monitoring, implementing, and documenting upgrades to instruments, sequencing chemistries, and reagents or kits used to generate NGS Data. 
Each laboratory performing NGS must have a policy in place that clearly documents indications for confirmatory testing and/or documents how their assay validation determined that such testing was not required.
CAP accredited laboratories must develop and follow a quality management plan. The design of the program must be written, and compliance with that design documented. 
 A good quality assurance program for laboratories performing NGS will include the following attributes: 1) The quality assurance program follows the path of workflow. The programs should assess pre-analytic steps occurring before NGS, analytic testing, and post-analytic processes used in sequence analysis through reporting; 2) The NGS quality program should be integrated within the institution's overall quality assurance program and fit well within its overall context if part of a larger institution; 3) The program should address common problems that arise in the course of testing. Documentation includes both review of the effectiveness of corrective actions taken and the revision of policies and procedures intended to prevent recurrence; 4) Goal of the quality program aims to ensure that testing is clinically relevant. The appropriateness of test orders and analytic decisions must be grounded in medical science and evidence; 5) The program should also encourage laboratory employees to communicate concerns about the quality of laboratory testing
Analytic performance of NGS procedures must be internally validated before clinical implementation. Each step needs to be individually optimized to empirically determine optimal assay conditions and analysis settings.
Essential performance characteristics that need to be determined during the validation are the analytic sensitivity and specificity, accuracy, precision, and limit of detection.
Validation should also be conducted independently for each accepted specimen type (blood, saliva, tissue, etc). 
Because it is not possible to validate all theoretically possible variants that can occur, it is necessary to use a combination of a "methods-based" and "analyte-specific" validation approach for determining a test's analytic performance. 
In most cases, Sanger sequencing is considered the gold standard comparative technique. However, variant validation information may also be obtained from oligonucleotide microarray genotyping data in some cases. 
NGS Work Group concluded that statistical considerations with regard to the number of samples CANNOT be universally or comprehensively applied across the numerous assays that are possible when using NGS sequencing methodology
Analytic sensitivity can be assessed by using a methods based approach that aims at maximizing the number of sequence variants that are compared to a gold standard method to increase confidence of analytic performance and these values may then be extrapolated to all bases. It is important to determine a "baseline" performance by using as many different genomic regions as possible, as sequence context can be an important influence. Laboratories should determine analytic performance separately for all variant types that are relevant for the test. 
It is useful to determine the average number of false positive calls for the regions tested in a clinical sample. Determining the limit of detection is important for assays that interrogate samples with heterogeneous genotypes. 
Precision (inter-run and intra-run variability) should be determined by using at least 3 samples. For tests that are performed with single-lane sequencers, intra-run variability may be determined by using bar-coded replicates of the same sample. 
Laboratories must be able to document compliance with their confirmatory testing policy and show evidence of ongoing monitoring of their NGS assay(s) to ensure that the benchmarks achieved during the validation process are maintained during the routine performance of NGS based clinical testing and variant reporting. 

The extent of revalidation and confirmation is dependent on the magnitude of the introduced changes and their potential consequences. Minor changes, can be addressed by confirming adequate performance. A major change would require a more extensive revalidation. 


A upfront bioinformatics homology analysis is useful to determine possible interference by homologous sequences. In addition, read-mapping quality can be used to identify problematic regions. If such genes are included in the NGS test, the laboratory must devise a method to ensure that identified variants are not due to pseudogene sequence and must document the accuracy of the method. When pooled sequencing of bar-coded samples is performed, the laboratory must document that individual sample identity is maintained throughout the wet bench process.
laboratories must use an SOP to document the bioinformatics pipeline used to analyze, interpret and report NGS results - include all algorithms, software and databases. Versions of each component must be recorded and traceable for each patient result. Must document customizations or include which parameters, cutoffs, and values are used. 
when describing the bioinformatics pipeline, laboratories should document the overall workflow of data analysis and include the input and output files for each process step. For each step, must develop and document quality control parameters. 
laboratories should also document the bioinformatics processes that are used for reducing a large variant data set to a list of causal and/or candidate genes and/or variants 
laboratories must have a policy for monitoring updates, patch-releases, and other upgrades to the bioinformatics pipeline. It should also address when such updates will be implemented. 
the laboratory should maintain records that clearly document regular monitoring and implementation of updates. 
laboratories must establish and follow a procedure for the storage of data files generated by the bioinformatics pipeline. It must specify data file retention times and which files will be retained after a final report has been generated. Policy for data storage and file retention times must be in accordance with local, state, and national requirements for storage of data. 
the NGS Work Group recommends that, if feasible, laboratories retain sequence files with corresponding quality scores (FASTQ files) or retain an archival format from which these files can be regenerated (BAM files) 
The specific versions of each component and, where available, associated configurations of the bioinformatics pipeline for analyzing NGS data, especially when based primarily on open-source software, is often composed of a combination of different software packages, scripts, and databases
for in house generated scripts and software packages, changes in the script or software should also be documented, but documentation of each component of the pipeline does not need to appear in the patient report. Rather, it is acceptable to refer to the pipeline as a whole, using a laboratory-specific designation. Laboratory specific designations should be unique to a single combination of pipeline components and configurations. 
Deviations from the laboratory SOP during any step used in the bioinformatics pipeline are documented in an exception log file. Any failures arising during the bioinformatics process should also be recorded in the exception log and include documentation of the issues, the results of any investigations, any corrective actions taken, and pertinent communications, with signoff by the lab director or designee. Exception log is also required to retain links to the patient reports. Documentation may also be incorporated into the monthly quality assurance report. 
deviation must be documented along with the outcome and explanation The reason for deviation should be described in the exception log, as well as the specific components of the deviation. Each deviation should be linked to the associated patient case and be reviewed by the appropriate laboratory director or designee. 
laboratories must establish rigorous processes to ensure the protection and privacy of this information [PHI]. Procedures to ensure confidentiality should include data encryption, secure data transfer, user authentication with controlled access to protected health information, and audit trails that track the transmission of data as well as the receiving entities and/or users. 
Laboratories should also follow standard requirements in the HIPPA when transferring sequencing data to maintain patient confidentiality and security.
while it may be possible to address the challenge of co-alignment of highly homologous sequences bioinformatically, laboratories may need to set up independent alternative method assays for these problematic regions.
laboratories must maintain a record of deviations from expected results and document the investigative measures that were used to determine the cause as well as the corrective measures that were implemented
labs must be aware of the lack of consensus in how transcript versions are used for variant numbering. Laboratories should have a mechanism to monitor for such changes and use great caution when any variant designation changes are made in clinical reports.

The laboratory must have a policy for selection of reference laboratories and other service providers for NGS test referral. Referral may include the entire NGS test process or only the wet bench or bioinformatics processes. The CAP Laboratory General Checklist requirement 41350 states that the laboratory director or designee is responsible for the selection of an external reference laboratory or other service provider. It is expected that the laboratory director or designee ensure the quality of performance of the external NGS wet bench and/or bioinformatics service provider. Some of the specific aspects that the laboratory director needs to consider in selecting external reference laboratories or service providers is the 1) turnaround time 2) is CLIA certified or meets selection criteria as per CAP requirements if providing analytic wet bench information, 3) quality of results from bioinformatics service provider is verified to be accurate and of high standards. For evidence of compliance, copies of valid CLIA certifications from CLIA-certified external reference laboratories are required for those who outsource the wet bench sequencing workflow. Copies of in-house validation of non-CLIA certified entities providing bioinformatics analysis are required for those entities that outsource the bioinformatics workflow.
The laboratory has a documented quality management program for the NGS bioinformatics pipeline. An appropriate quality management program provides the structure and process for investigating these divergences to pinpoint possible causes, and institute appropriate corrective measures.
laboratories must empirically determine which algorithms and associated bioinformatics tools to apply to each diagnostic application 
once a satisfactory bioinformatics validation has been achieved, translation of the NGSD assay into the clinical laboratory requires that laboratories document all aspects of the bioinformatics processes used for clinical diagnostics and implement a quality management program for these steps 
the laboratory should assess the error rates for several representative examples by variant type. NGS Work Group acknowledged that it was not feasible to comprehensively and exhaustively define the error rates for false positives and false negatives in variant calls. 
indexed sequences need to be validated with respect to their uniqueness in a pool and the pipeline must be able to accurately bin such indexed sequences. It is essential to establish criteria for retention or exclusion of sequence reads. 
for those assays in which limit of detection is relevant, such as identification of somatic mutations in tumor samples, the bioinformatics pipeline needs to be assessed for that parameter
when using exome and genome sequencing for causal and candidate gene identification, the laboratory must additionally validate its bioinformatics pipeline for this purpose.
evidence of compliance for a bioinformatics pipeline validation/revalidation would include the records of validation and any subsequent revalidation and their documented approval for clinical use 

the laboratory validates the bioinformatics pipeline and revalidates the entire pipeline and/or confirms he performance of the components of the pipeline as satisfactory when modifications are made. The extent of revalidation and/or confirmation is modification dependent. For labs offering the entire process from wet bench through bioinformatics analysis, the validation of the bioinformatics pipeline should be included in the overall test validation. 
Therefore, any change to a different version of a software package, script, or internal or external database, or change to the configuration of any software, would require a new unique laboratory-specific designation and would require assay validation
Once a bioinformatics pipeline has been validated to meet laboratory requirement and has been implemented, revalidation is required when any changes are made in the pipeline. A practical approach that can be used to revalidate a sequencing pipeline is to use sequence read files from the original validation and simply reanalyze them with the new parameters.

it is recommended that laboratories use the Web-based versions of the ACMG guidelines as they represent the latest revisions. It is recommended that the ACMG classification system for inherited diseases be used as reference to increase consistency in variant classification. Disease and gene-specific modification may be necessary and should be documented. For other clinical genomic testing, the laboratory should use its best judgment to categorize variants and adopt guidelines as they emerge. 
laboratories should be cautious when interpreting the potential clinical consequences of sequence changes and carefully consider evidence for disease causation, frequency in the general population, and functional studies. 
laboratories should be aware of the potential for finding incidental, clinically significant results

It is therefore useful to provide the transcript accession number and version along with the protein syntax in clinical reports to help avoid confusion. 
laboratories should have a policy in place for whether and how these results will be reported for those assays where such incidental findings are expected. ACMG recommendations include a minimum gene list for which, if a known mutation is found, it should be reported. Labs may choose to follow ACMG recommendations or develop their own policies. If the laboratory's policy is not to report incidental findings or to limit reporting to a subset of variants related to a particular disease state, this should be clearly stated in the laboratory report for assays where incidental findings are expected. 
ethical considerations must also be taken into account when deciding whether to reveal certain genetic information to patients. 











level of evidence in therapy, diagnosis, and prognosis should be continuously evaluated based on evolving research data and modified accordingly 

(3 analysis) - Understand the content of the database and how the data are aggregated; review the source, type and intent of the database; pay specific attention to the limitation of each database to avoid over-interpretation of annotation results; ensure appropriate HGVS annotation; whenever possible use genomic coordinates instead of HGVS nomenclature to unambiguously query genomic databases; assess the quality of the provided genomic data (based on source, number of specific entry, controls, confirmation of a variant's origin, functional/potential drug studies); verify data quality 

use reference sequence databases for unambiguous representation of sequence variants. Additional information is critically important for generating correct HGVS nomenclature for variants. Also allows for unequivocal representation of the variants in the absence of genomic coordinate information. 
Use population databases to get comprehensive information about frequencies of alternative (minor) alleles to filter out variants that are deemed polymorphic/benign based on an arbitrary cutoff of MAF. In the absence of paired normal tissue, the work group recommends using 1% as a primary cutoff. Clinical labs may consider using ethnicity specific MAFs. Take special care when evaluating hematological malignancies to not annotate mutated genes as polymorphisms
Cancer-specific databases provide information about the incidence and prevalence of sequence variants. Interpret with caution because of poor representation of the pathology diagnosis standards, lack of clinical-grade curation, and loosely controlled sources of submitted variants in some. 
Human Gene Mutation Database, ClinVar and other disease or locus specific mutation databases are useful resources for evaluating these variants.
clinical laboratories should establish a well-annotated in-house database for both tracking variants identified within the laboratory and provide consistent variant annotations. 
Exercise caution when interpreting in silico scores. It is recommended that the results of these prediction algorithms should never be used as the sole evidence for variant classification or clinical decision making. 
Certain metrics for called variant are critical for variant interpretation, such as supporting reads and VAF, and should be included in variant evaluation. For further clinical interpretation, additional metadata that add meaningful and readily identifiable information to variants should be included. Additional resources (X-references to external databases, in silico algorithm based predications) can also be beneficial 
It is essential to use correct mRNA transcript accession and version information when multiple alternative transcripts exist to ensure consistent representation of variants, according to HGVS nomenclature, and support accurate interpretation. It is also important that clinical laboratories use the genomic coordinate to store variants in their in-house database to warrant unambiguous references. 
Interpretation of somatic variants should be focused on their impact on clinical care. Clinical impacts should include therapeutic, prognostic, diagnostic and preventive actions. 
Clinical and experimental evidence for biomarkers are grouped into 4 levels - A, B, C, D (table 3) - to determine the significance of their clinical impact. Also can be assigned to genomic variants to determine the significance of their clinical impact into 4 tiers - I (Level A and B evidence), II (level C or D evidence), III (unknown clinical significance), and IV (benign or likely benign) (Figure 2). 
Peer-reviewed literature, clinical practice guidelines, and large-scale cancer mutation databases remain primary resources for evidence needed to effectively assess clinical significance of a particular variant 
it is important to distinguish acquired somatic variants from inherited germline variants. Laboratories must have policies that address detection, disclosure/nondisclosure, and interpretation/reporting of germline variants. When a matched control is not included in the analysis, the laboratory should have criteria that can be sued to infer that a variant is somatic or germline. Literature review and database queries can also help to determine whether the variant has been reported previously as a recurrent germline variant in patients with a predisposition syndrome. 

All clinically critical information should be at the beginning of the report and formatted in a prominent manner to increase the likelihood that it is seen and understood. It is desirable to include graphs, charts, and tables to increase the overall clarity of the report, provided that they can be integrated into the medical record. 
all detected genetic alterations should be classified into a 4-tiered system (I, II, III, IV)
all detected genetic alterations should be annotated and reported as designated by the HUGO Gene Nomenclature. Colloquial nomenclature should be included in addition to the standard nomenclature, as needed, to convey meaning with clarity to the physicians reading the reports and using them to determine treatment. Reporting of genomic variants using HGVS nomenclature allows for unambiguous remapping of the variant to the reference genome, and colloquial nomenclature delivers a clear message to the clinical team. 
Other elements that may be relevant for more thorough analysis - genomic coordinates, genome build, transcript reference sequence - should be reported provided it does not detract from the ease of interpretation. It is advisable to include this information in a table format toward the end of the section or in another section with extended description of results, away from the topline results.
The report should include the sequencing coverage cutoff for the NGS assay used. All genes and/or hotspots not meeting the minimal required sequencing coverage criteria should be declared in the report as having failed 
reports should not be limited to positive findings. Pertinent negatives should be reported, in a disease-specific manner. Uncertainty, if present, must be communicated in reports; including issues of sequence quality, sample adequacy, tumor content, and biomedical knowledge
It is useful to provide an interpretive comment on detected genetic alterations that puts the alteration in clinicopathologic context to inform management decisions. The comments may include functional, prognostic, or predictive significance of the variant for particular tumor recommendations should be made wherever possible and defensible based on evidence with appropriate literature citations. Should be short and worded carefully. Treatment suggestions within the NGS laboratory report should be evidence based, should be relevant to the patient's cancer diagnosis, and should contain language to make it clear that he report contains generalized treatment suggestions incorporating the data points available to the laboratory, but that additional factors need to be incorporated into crafting a treatment plan for each individual. 
Recommendations for specific clinical trials should NOT be made. Although general statements about availability of relevant trials or citing results of published trials is acceptable. 
methodologic details should be presented at the bottom of the reports and should include descriptions of method, assay performance characteristics, and critical quality metrics for the assay run. Should include details of what was actually tested. Specific gene loci, exons, or hot spots tested should be listed in the final report. 
report should be in a format that enables integration with an electronic health record. Web-based reporting under appropriately secured conditions is an enhanced option but should not be a substitute for a report in the medical record. 

somatic test results should be available to privileged health care workers. However, the results of the tests performed under research protocols, even when performed in a CLIA lab should not be reported into the medical record without specified approval from the responsible institutional review board.
We strongly encourage somatic variant data sharing and urge clinical laboratories to contribute their well-curated variants to public variant databases to facilitate accurate interpretation of somatic variants. Such a submission process should be standardized and in compliance with federal privacy regulations. 
- Interpretation of germline sequence variations should focus on pathogenicity of a variant for a specific disease or disease causality
Interpretation of germline variants should follow ACMG/AMP standards and guidelines for the interpretation of germline sequence variants.

the ACMG recommends disclosure of positive germline results for 53 genes, approximately half of which are associated with cancer predisposition susceptibility genes that will likely be on somatic testing panels. Disclosure is recommended even when the germline is only being evaluated as part of a tumor/normal study.
germline variants should be reported as per ACMG/AMP guidelines. 
In the absence of paired normal sequencing data to differentiate somatic variants from constitutional/inherited variants, clinical judgement should be used when reporting potential germline pathogenic variants identified in cancer tissue because many germline pathogenic variants may also occur as acquired somatic variants in cancer. For definitive classification of germline status, sequencing of non-tumor tissue should be performed. 
germline NGS data can be re-reviewed at a later time and reported after appropriate patient consent is received. If germline variants are not reported in some of the genes in an NGS panel, the initial report should specifically state that fact. 
if paired germline samples are not used, the report should have a disclaimer that the NGS test used does not allow definitive differentiation between germline and somatic variants. The reports should include a statement addressing the manner in which the distinction between somatic and germline alterations is made, and indications of remaining uncertainty, where appropriate. 

estimation of tumor cell fraction should be performed - different for hematological malignancies and solid tumors (microscopic review by a trained/certified pathologist before submitted for NGS analysis); for cases with more inflammation and necrosis one should remain conservative in estimations and review of mutant allele fractions would allow
for more precise estimates of tumor purity and would allow for more accurate results and confident recommendations for further testing if needed

We recommend that library qualification should be performed. An appropriate method for quantitation should be defined during the O&F and validation phases.


Optimization and familiarization is required before the formal process of assay validation can begin - should address library complexity, required depth of sequence, and preliminary performance specifications using well-characterized reference materials and have different technologists performing the testing on different days. Also should include systematic evaluation of the bioinformatics pipeline. 
We recommend the O&F phase must be performed before NGS test validation, the wet bench protocol and the bioinformatics pipeline should be established for all clinically relevant variant types, reference cell lines or reference materials should be used for initial evaluation of panel performance, mixing studies should be performed to estimate assay performance for each variant type intended for clinical use, and whenever possible, all specimen types and preparations intended for clinical use should be tested during O&F phase to evaluate the sequencing process in an end-to-end manner 
We recommend that the library complexity should be evaluated by dilution experiments using various amounts of DNA input during assay O&F phase or by other methods involving unique molecular identifiers as per discretion of the laboratory director

Recommended to include only those genes that have sufficient scientific evidence for the disease diagnosis, prognostication, or treatment; recommend that that the laboratory should determine gene content based on available scientific evidence and clinical validity and utility of the NGS assay. The scientific evidence use to support NGS panel design should be documented in the validation protocol 
we recommend that the likelihood, detectability, and severity of harm of potential errors should be determined at each step. Anticipated potential errors specific to the detection of somatic variants in tumor tissue by NGS should be addressed. Potential errors should be addressed through assay design, method validation, and/or quality controls 
It is recommended that accuracy should be stated in terms of PPA and PPV. NGS panel validation should include the outlined validation protocol with defined types and number of samples, established PPA and PPV, reproducibility and repeatability of variant detection, reportable range, reference range, limits of detection, interfering substances, clinical sensitivity and specificity, validation of bioinformatics pipelines and other parameters
template for documenting and describing validation: http://www.amp.org/committees/clinical_practice/ValidationResources.cfm
we recommend that the validation samples include previously characterized clinical samples of the specimen type intended for the assay, previously characterized clinical samples with each type of pathogenic alteration that the assay is intended to detect, samples with the most common mutations relevant to the intended clinical use of the panel; two or more samples for which a consensus sequence has been previously established for all regions covered by the panel; and a minimum of 59 samples to assess quality metrics and performance characteristics 
we recommend that PPA and PPV should be documented for each variant type. For types with <59 samples, the lab should supplement the NGS test with another validated test until the number of samples reached, or to include appropriate controls, or clearly state the limitations in the report
We recommend that a minimum of 3 samples should be tested across all NGS testing steps to include all instruments, testing personnel, and multiple lots of reagents. Variance should be quantified at each NGS testing step for which data are available 
Recommend that both ranges will depend on the intended use of the test and should be determined as part of the validation process. Both should be included in the patient report
we recommend that the LLOD for each variant type should be determined with a minimum of 59 samples. If sufficient samples can't be sourced, sensitivity controls should be used 
we recommend that the possible sources of test interference should be specifically identified, with the impact of each systematically evaluated during validation. The risk of carryover should be evaluated at each step of the assay. A no template control should be included in every run but need not be evaluated all of the way through sequencing.
We recommend that clinical validity (ie, clinical sensitivity and specificity) and clinical utility of the NGS assays needs to be defined during design of the test and need to be evaluated during the validation process. The validation protocol has to include the NGS panel content, the intended use of the test, potential clinical validity and utility, and references. Full scale of clinical validation is required for multi-analyte NGS tests with prediction algorithms and should be performed using the guidelines and calculations as defined for an analytical validation.

We recommend a minimal depth coverage of > 250 reads per tested amplicon or target for somatic variant detection. In certain limited circumstances, minimal depth < 250 reads may be acceptable but the appropriateness should be justified based on intended limit of detection, the quality of the reads, and tolerance for false-positive or false-negative results

the 4 main classes of sequence variants (SNVs, indels, CNSs, and SVs) each require a different computational approach for sensitive and specific identification;
We recommend that the laboratory directors should consider the following during clinical NGS platform selection: size of the panel, expected testing volume, required test turnaround time, availability of bioinformatics support, provider's degree of technological innovation, platform flexibility, and scalability, and laboratory resources, technical expertise, and manufacturer's level of technical support

the range of software tools and the type of validation required depends on the assay design (SNV vs indels vs CNA vs SV). 
Published comparisons of various bioinformatics tools for SNV detection may be helpful; Analysis of allele frequency at commonly occurring SNVs can be a useful indicator of CNAs or loss of heterozygosity. In NGS data; for detecting SVs, multiple tools should be evaluated to determine which has optimal performance characteristics for the particular assay under consideration
It is important to select and appropriately validate the bioinformatics pipeline for fusion detection.
We recommend that available reference materials that are appropriate for the type of variants, and their anticipated ranges, should be used to validate the bioinformatics pipeline

We recommend that any additions or changes to a validated NGS test should have a supplemental validation, including a validation protocol and summary. Potential sources of error that may result from the changes should be assessed during the supplemental validation. The supplemental validation should include a number of known samples in an end-to-end manner. Samples selected for this process should specifically address potential errors that are introduced by the modifications


2 major approaches to detect gene fusions in targeted oncology NGS panels: sequence DNA using hybridization capture method or to sequence RNA (cDNA) by amplification based methods. Each of these methods is currently used in the clinical setting.

We recommend that the laboratory should monitor specimen acceptability. Specimens that are not validated for NGS assay should be rejected. Before testing, tumor tissue
samples should be reviewed by an appropriately trained and board-certified pathologist for specimen suitability and selection of areas for macrodissection/microdissection. Enrichment for neoplastic cells should be considered (e.g., macrodissection/microdissection). For liquid samples, flow cytometry or other methods should be used to evaluate
the sampleÕs percentage of neoplastic cells. Laboratories should archive either a representative slide or image of the tissue tested. 
We recommend that the laboratory should monitor quality and quantity of nucleic acids (DNA, RNA) using fluorometric quantitation methods.
We recommend that for targeted NGS, a no template control should be included into library preparation to verify that there is no contamination of reagents. Sensitivity controls should be included when necessary to ensure the detection of variants at the LLOD. Cell line mixtures (with different variants and different VAFs) are a convenient
source of positive controls and sensitivity controls in the same sample.
We recommend that confirmation by conventional orthogonal method should be considered for unexpected or perplexing results. The choice of the method for variant confirmation is at the discretion of the laboratory director.
We recommend that the laboratory should participate in an appropriate proficiency testing program.

labs must ensure accuracy of software generated HGVS variant nomenclature and annotations and have alert in place when software generated nomenclature needs to be reviewed and/or corrected, document any changes 
design and implementation of pipeline must ensure the security of identifiable patient information and be compliant with all applicable laws at the local, state, and national level (follow HIPPA) 
have specific measures to ensure that each data fail generated in the pipeline maintains its integrity and provides alerts for or prevents use of unauthorized/unintended altered data files 

clinical labs offering NGS based testing should perform their own validation of the bioinformatics pipeline. Lab must determine its performance characteristics for the specific clinical test purpose, assessed using samples or reference materials with known variants 
a qualified medical pro with appropriate training in NGS interpretation and certification must oversee and be involved in the validation process -design/familiarization/optimization/validation of pipeline 
validation must be performed only after completion of design, development, optimization, and familiarization of the pipeline + components. should closely emulate the real-world environment of lab in which testing happens 
should include all individual components of the bioinformatics pipeline used in the analysis which must be reviewed and approved by qualified pro and lab director 
validation of pipeline must be appropriate and applicable for the intended clinical use, specimen, and variant types detected by the NGS test. Include the right kind of variants that are clinically significant 
must ensure pipeline are compliant with applicable lab accreditation standards and regulations 
identity of sample must be preserved throughout each step of the NGS bioinformatics pipeline with a minimum of 4 unique identifiers (include unique location identifier within the content of each data file read and/or generated by pipeline) 
Specific QC and QA parameters must be evaluated during validation and used to determine satisfactory performance of the bioinformatics pipeline 
validate the methods used to alter or filter sequence reads, keep methods and test documentation according to the laboratory accreditation standards and regulations 
in silico (via computer) validation can be used to supplement pipeline validation, but NOT in lieu of end-to-end validation of bioinformatics pipelines using human samples 
of pipeline must include confirmation of a representative set of variants with high quality independent data, appropriate validation metrics by variant type should be reported 


supplemental validation is required whenever a significant change is made to any component of the pipeline 
use HGVS nomenclature 

description of region(s) of genome targeted by assay; description of entire testing process from wet to dry lab; description of specific procedure(s) for confirmation testing 

quality control metrics; acceptance criteria; Q20; establish criteria for depth and uniformity of coverage (i.e. number of reads across all target areas); min average of 500+ reads recommended; 
define minimum coverage below which cannot confidently define the area's mutation status; define minimum % and/or variant reads in background of normal reads required to call a variant "detected"; establish level of confidence and sensitivity; define max bias; verification/reverification of analytical sensitivity; chronological documentation; revalidation of software updates 

AMP reporting guidelines; include all detected somatic variants; report variants only with confirmation or assay is fully validated 

3rd party review via FDA is available for labs with current NYS permit in Oncology-Molecular and Cellular Tumor Markers 

separately report possible germline variants and alert treating physician and recommend variant confirmation by approved lab; report assay limitations 

NTC in amplification to ensure no contamination; negative control for analytical accuracy and specificity; positive/sensitivity control in each run near sensitivity of assay to verify sensitivity, use defined rotation sample if too many variants for 1 control sample 

establish and separately validate performance characteristics for each intended variant of the assay and sample type (FFPE, FF, WB, BM, FNA, ctDNA), demonstrate quality sequences, define areas that fail to meet minimum quality metrics; table and graph of read depths; validate analytical accuracy, initial validation, full validation (different thresholds of minimum data for SNVs, Indels, CNVs, Translocations, MSI, Tumor mutation burden), precision, reproducibility (all precision and reproducibility should be performed for all intended variant types at lower limit of nucleic acid input and VAF) 


demonstrate accuracy, reproducibility, and sensitivity of the bioinformatics process; for initial validation use a single version of all analyses software 


